ingress: Update gateway-api with LB management (#1332)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/ingress/gateway-api-with-cluster-ingress-operator.md

  name: gateway
  namespace: openshift-ingress
spec:

>   gatewayClassName: openshift-default

Reviewer: I know that during conformance testing, we don't actually know the gateway is available until one of the `spec.addresses` responds.  It may be worthwhile in our endeavors to use the responsiveness of the gateway address to determine status.

Author: Do you mean the ingress operator could do something like the canary check but for the gateway?  That might become necessary in the far off future when replacing the default IngressController with a Gateway becomes feasible, but I don't think it's necessary at time time.

Reviewer: That's fine.  I don't think the `addresses` field is an istio-ism though.

Author: "istio-ingressgateway.openshift-ingress.svc.cluster.local" has "istio" right in it.  * grin *.  Ideally the gateway owner should be able to put the desired name in `spec.addresses`, which is one thing I'm trying to achieve with this revision to the design.

Reviewer: Moot.

LoadBalancer-type service for a Gateway, and managing DNS for the same.  This
requires the following changes:

* Refactor the existing DNS management logic to enable its re-use.
* Add a new controller to manage Gateway API CRDs.

> * Add a new controller to install and configure Service Mesh Operator.

Reviewer: To match up with L274
```suggestion
* Add a new controller to install and configure Service Mesh.
```

Author: How about "the OpenShift Service Mesh Operator"?  I think that that is less ambiguous ("configure Service Mesh" might be interpreted as "configure a service mesh").  Changed in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/compare/213a342986d10d3ebaaf83ee784ca2867d8b0eb7..dffce6339d368666c5acbb4272e29b8cee3166b2.

the IngressController API.  In particular, using a LoadBalancer-type service is
supported; using a NodePort-type service or host networking is not.

#### New Controller to Manage Gateway API CRDs

This enhancement adds a new controller to create the gatewayclasses CRD.  For
dev preview, this controller watches for the "GatewayAPI" feature to be enabled
in the cluster featuregate.  When the feature is enabled, this controller
installs the Gateway API CRDs, including the gatewayclasses CRD, which enables
the cluster admin to create a new GatewayClass.

The Ingress Operator effectively owns the Gateway API CRDs.  It installs
versions of the CRDs that are compatible with the OSSM version that it installs,
and if the CRDs are already installed, the operator may overwrite them.

> #### New Controller to Install and Configure OpenShift Service Mesh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### New Controller to Install and Configure OpenShift Service Mesh Operator
```

The enhancement adds another new controller to reconcile GatewayClasses by
installing OpenShift Service Mesh (OSSM) when appropriate.  When the cluster
admin creates a GatewayClass that specifies the
"openshift.io/gateway-controller" controller name, this controller then does the
following:

> 1. Create a Subscription to install OSSM.

Reviewer: Can we make a note that "create a subcscription" isn't implemented in Dev Preview? (and make sure a Jira exists for this)

Author: What do you mean?  Creating the subscription is implemented here: https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/a29464eda9614ac3d70c185b572f4839195e7306/pkg/operator/controller/gatewayclass/subscription.go

Reviewer: My mistake.  I thought I had to run the install script because this wasn't implemented, but there was a different reason I had to run the install script.

2. Create a ServiceMeshControlPlane to configure OSSM.

When OSSM is installed, it deploys the Istio control-plane.  The Ingress
Operator configures the ServiceMeshControlPlane to enable Gateway API support,
which means that Istio watches Gateway and HTTPRoute objects and configures
Envoy accordingly.  The Ingress Operator also configures the
ServiceMeshControlPlane to enable Istio's "[Automated Deployment](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/gateway-api/#automated-deployment)" feature,
which means that Istio automatically creates an Envoy proxy deployment and a
LoadBalancer-type service for each Gateway.  Suppose the cluster admin creates a
Gateway that specifies a GatewayClass with OpenShift's controller name:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: gateway
  namespace: openshift-ingress
spec:
  gatewayClassName: openshift-default
  # ...
```

Then OSSM configures Istio and Envoy and creates a LoadBalancer-type service:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  labels:
    gateway.istio.io/managed: openshift.io-gateway-controller
  name: gateway
  namespace: openshift-ingress
  ownerReferences:

>   - apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2

Reviewer: Even though this is as its done now, this is a bug, it should be v1beta1. Or maybe
```suggestion
  - apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/<currentversion>
```

Author: I made an effort to have this document accurately reflect what you would see on an actual cluster.  How about if I add a footnote that this may change, with a reference to https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-8681?  Updated in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/compare/213a342986d10d3ebaaf83ee784ca2867d8b0eb7..dffce6339d368666c5acbb4272e29b8cee3166b2.

Operator configures the ServiceMeshControlPlane to enable Gateway API support,
which means that Istio watches Gateway and HTTPRoute objects and configures
Envoy accordingly.  The Ingress Operator also configures the
ServiceMeshControlPlane to enable Istio's "[Automated Deployment](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/gateway-api/#automated-deployment)" feature,
which means that Istio automatically creates an Envoy proxy deployment and a
LoadBalancer-type service for each Gateway.  The Ingress Operator then
configures DNS for each such service (see [New Controller to Manage DNS Records
for Gateway Listeners](#new-controller-to-manage-dns-records-for-gateway-listeners)).  With the Ingress Operator and Service Mesh Operator
together configuring a load balancer and DNS, this enables clients to connect
through Envoy to backend applications as specified by the Gateway and HTTPRoute
objects.

Following is the ServiceMeshControlPlane CR that the Ingress Operator creates:

```yaml
apiVersion: maistra.io/v2
kind: ServiceMeshControlPlane
metadata:
  name: gwapi
  namespace: openshift-ingress
spec:
  profiles:

>   - gateway-controller

Reviewer 2: Just a reminder to remove profile configuration, as a result of our discussion on OSSM 2.3 vs. 2.4, if we have to go with OSSM 2.3, the gateway-controller profile wont' be available, and it's not really providing a whole lot of value.

Reviewer 2: Here's what I have for a SMCP, just for reference:
```
apiVersion: maistra.io/v2
kind: ServiceMeshControlPlane
metadata:
  name: gwapi
  namespace: openshift-ingress
spec:
  tracing:
    type: None
  proxy:
    accessLogging:
      envoyService:
        enabled: true
      file:
        name: /dev/stdout
  policy:
    type: Istiod
  gateways:
    egress:
      enabled: false
    ingress:
      service:
        type: LoadBalancer
      enabled: true
      ingress: true
  addons:
    grafana:
      enabled: false
    kiali:
      enabled: false
    prometheus:
      enabled: false
    jaeger:
      name: jaeger
      install: {}
  security:
    manageNetworkPolicy: false
  techPreview:
    controlPlaneMode:
      ClusterScoped
  runtime:
    components:
      pilot:
        container:
          env:
            PILOT_ENABLE_GATEWAY_API: "true"
            PILOT_ENABLE_GATEWAY_API_STATUS: "true"
            PILOT_ENABLE_GATEWAY_API_DEPLOYMENT_CONTROLLER: "true"
            PILOT_GATEWAY_API_CONTROLLER_NAME: openshift.io/gateway-controller
  version: v2.3
```

        container:
          env:
            PILOT_GATEWAY_API_CONTROLLER_NAME: openshift.io/gateway-controller
  version: v2.4
  techPreview:         # [1]
    controlPlaneMode: ClusterScoped
```
[1]: Specifying `techPreview.controlPlaneMode: ClusterScoped` is currently required even when specifying `spec.profiles: gateway-controller` due to a known issue in OSSM.

This SMCP uses OSSM's built-in "gateway-controller" profile to enable Gateway
API.  Specifying this profile is equivalent to specifying the following
configuration on the SMCP:

```yaml
spec:
  techPreview:
    controlPlaneMode: ClusterScoped
    gatewayAPI:
      enabled: true
      controllerMode: true
  addons:
    grafana:
      enabled: false
    jaeger:
      install: {}
      name: jaeger
    kiali:
      enabled: false
    prometheus:
      enabled: false
  gateways:
    egress:
      enabled: false
    ingress:
      enabled: true
      ingress: true
  policy:
    type: Istiod
  security:
    manageNetworkPolicy: false
  tracing:
    type: None
```

The above configuration enables Gateway API with a cluster-scoped control-plane.
This means that OSSM watches Gateway API resources in all namespaces.  The above

> configuration also enables ingress and egress proxies for service mesh; a

Reviewer: Are you sure you want to enable ingress and egress proxies for SM in dev preview? It would mean alot more testing.

Author: It would probably be reasonable to do a test to make sure the mesh functionality works with an example application.  More than that isn't necessary for dev preview IMO.

> namespace can subsequently be added to the mesh using ServiceMeshMember and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
namespace can subsequently be watched by the mesh using ServiceMeshMember and
```

Author: I'm using the terminology I see in the OSSM documentation, for example this: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.11/service_mesh/v2x/ossm-create-mesh.html

1. Install the Gateway API CRDs other than the gatewayclasses CRD, namely the gateways and httproutes CRDs.
2. Create a Subscription to install OSSM.
3. Create a ServiceMeshControlPlane to configure OSSM.

The Ingress Operator effectively owns the Gateway API CRDs.  It installs
versions of the CRDs that are compatible with the OSSM version that it installs,
and if the CRDs are already installed, the operator may overwrite them.

When OSSM is installed, it deploys the Istio control-plane.  The Ingress
Operator configures the ServiceMeshControlPlane to enable Gateway API support,
which means that Istio watches Gateway and HTTPRoute objects and configures
Envoy accordingly.  The Ingress Operator also configures the
ServiceMeshControlPlane to enable Istio's "[Automated Deployment](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/gateway-api/#automated-deployment)" feature,
which means that Istio automatically creates an Envoy proxy deployment and a

> LoadBalancer-type service for each Gateway.  The Ingress Operator then

Reviewer 2: Should we address the need for proxy protocol or other LB configuration options?

The default functionality is to not add any annotations  to the service, though you mentioned they can be carried over from the Gateway. So, in AWS, proxy protocol is disabled, and we get an ELB by default.

However, like we've talked about before, we don't preserve the client IP, which impacts debuggablity (since everything looks like it's coming from the ELB) and we can't do approve list deny list-type functions (though, that's a moot point because you can't do it anyways with GWAPI...).

I know there's a laundry list of things that we set as defaults for loadbalancers. Should we begin to address them here in a design? Will the ingress operator ever interact and override these annotations? How do we manage the philosophy of our  "opinionated defaults" when some of these options are now uncontrollable by us?

I'm guessing it's worth mentioning some of these configuration options, but for dev preview, I'd imagine we are just going to use the defaults and not have cluster-ingress-operator intervene.

Author: Yes, let's go with the defaults for dev preview.  I'll add a note.  

If the Ingress Operator does add these annotations, does the Service Mesh Operator ever overwrite them?  In any case, having two controllers updating the same object is an invitation for problems, so better we should find a way by which the Ingress Operator can override the Service Mesh Operator's template.

Author: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/compare/2e06c5d3e457b776516f2e706c9567af34af82c9..a4236cc53936ad920e7aa63bd4a2957201a63aba#diff-7973eca3c2f112ece8f8585f4f4c6567fc1c1b4fa95be7f88a27ce08820d89f7 added the note.

clients to connect through Envoy to backend applications as specified by the
Gateway and HTTPRoute objects.

Following is the ServiceMeshControlPlane CR that the Ingress Operator creates:

```yaml
apiVersion: maistra.io/v2
kind: ServiceMeshControlPlane
metadata:
  name: gwapi
  namespace: openshift-ingress

> spec:

Reviewer 2: Would it be smart to turn on access logging for dev preview? I feel like that might be quite helpful and we know folks aren't supposed to use it for production, right?
```
  proxy:
    accessLogging:
      envoyService:
        enabled: true
      file:
        name: /dev/stdout
```

Author: That seems reasonable.  Added.

  profiles:
  - gateway-controller
  runtime:
    components:
      pilot:
        container:
          env:
            PILOT_GATEWAY_API_CONTROLLER_NAME: openshift.io/gateway-controller
  version: v2.4
  techPreview:         # [1]
    controlPlaneMode:
      ClusterScoped
```
[1]: Specifying `techPreview.controlPlaneMode: ClusterScoped` is currently required even when specifying `spec.profiles: gateway-controller` due to a known issue in OSSM.

This SMCP uses OSSM's built-in "gateway-controller" profile to enable Gateway
API.  Specifying this profile is equivalent to specifying the following
configuration on the SMCP:

```yaml
spec:
  techPreview:
    controlPlaneMode:
      ClusterScoped
    gatewayAPI:
      enabled: true
      controllerMode: true
  addons:
    grafana:
      enabled: false
    jaeger:
      install: {}
      name: jaeger
    kiali:
      enabled: false
    prometheus:
      enabled: false
  gateways:
    egress:
      enabled: false
    ingress:
      enabled: true
      ingress: true
  policy:
    type: Istiod
  security:
    manageNetworkPolicy: false
  tracing:
    type: None

> ```

Reviewer 2: What about:
```
  runtime:
    components:
      pilot:
        container:
          env:
            PILOT_ENABLE_GATEWAY_API: "true"
            PILOT_ENABLE_GATEWAY_API_STATUS: "true"
            PILOT_ENABLE_GATEWAY_API_DEPLOYMENT_CONTROLLER: "true"
```
I think Daniel mention some of these were possibly going to be encapsulated in the spec.ingress.gateway, but I'm not so sure. Where did you pull this information from?

Author: Right, specifying `profiles: ["gateway-controller"]` should be equivalent to specifying `spec.techPreview.gatewayAPI.enabled` and `spec.techPreview.gatewayAPI.controllerMode` (as well as some other options), which should be equivalent to specifying the environment variables that you mentioned.  I have yet to test this; I'm basing this on Daniel's demo on 2023-01-16 and the follow-up discussion on 2023-02-02.

Reviewer 2: Yea I remember Daniel mentioning that you couldn't actually enable Gateway API without enabling `PILOT_ENABLE_GATEWAY_API_DEPLOYMENT_CONTROLLER=true`, but I think he mentioned he was going to try to change that.

ServiceMeshMemberRoll CRs following existing practices (see [Adding services to
a service mesh](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12/service_mesh/v2x/ossm-create-mesh.html) and [Managing users and profiles](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12/service_mesh/v2x/ossm-profiles-users.html#ossm-control-plane-profiles_ossm-profiles-users) in the Service Mesh
product documentation).

#### New Controller to Manage Load Balancers for Gateway Listeners

This enhancement adds a new controller to manage load balancers for Gateways.
This controller watches the gateways resource, scoped to the "openshift-ingress"
namespace.  For example, suppose a Gateway has the following definition (some
extraneous details are abbreviated):

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: example-gateway
  namespace: openshift-ingress
spec:
  listeners:
  - name: stage-http
    hostname: "*.stage.example.com"
    port: 80
  - name: stage-https
    hostname: "*.stage.example.com"
    port: 443
  - name: prod-https
    hostname: "*.prod.example.com"
    port: 443
```

In this configuration, the Gateway defines three listeners with two different

> TCP ports: 80 and 443.  For this Gateway, the Ingress Operator creates the

Reviewer 2: I'm a little confused, maybe I'm missing something. Automated deployments currently do this, they create a Deployment and a Service. Is that what you are trying to describe? Also, if we did this, how would the Gateway attach/link to the service? You'd need to configure `spec.addresses` for a manual deployment right?

For reference, here's the service that Automatic Deployments create:
```
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2023-02-06T19:43:37Z"
  finalizers:
  - service.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-cleanup
  labels:
    gateway.istio.io/managed: istio.io-gateway-controller
  name: gateway
  namespace: gwapi
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
    kind: Gateway
    name: gateway
    uid: 54fc38b9-1882-4cea-816f-264286fe4d10
  resourceVersion: "132541"
  uid: 3d08f142-b252-4c77-831a-414a77e11650
spec:
  allocateLoadBalancerNodePorts: true
  clusterIP: 172.30.79.218
  clusterIPs:
  - 172.30.79.218
  externalTrafficPolicy: Cluster
  internalTrafficPolicy: Cluster
  ipFamilies:
  - IPv4
  ipFamilyPolicy: SingleStack
  ports:
  - name: status-port
    nodePort: 30616
    port: 15021
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: 15021
  - name: http
    nodePort: 32720
    port: 80
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: 80
  selector:
    istio.io/gateway-name: gateway
  sessionAffinity: None
  type: LoadBalancer
status:
  loadBalancer:
    ingress:
    - hostname: a3d08f142b2524c77831a414a77e1165-840945604.us-east-1.elb.amazonaws.com
```

Author: Thanks, that's very helpful!  I didn't realize the automated deployment feature also created the service.  However, that raises a bevy of questions:

* Is the service always configured with `type: LoadBalancer`?  
* Is the service always configured with `externalTrafficPolicy: Cluster`?  Can we specify `externalTrafficPolicy: Local` instead?  
* Can we configure the service to use an NLB on AWS, or configure timeouts, health checks, and so on? 
* Why does the service define a "status-port" port?  What does this port expose, and how is it secured?  
* Why doesn't your example have a port for HTTPS?  
* How does Istio name the ports?  
* How does Istio handle the case where two listeners specify the same port?  
* Does Istio tie the service's lifecycle to the gateway's?  (The owner reference suggests that it does.)  
* What is the significance of the `gateway.istio.io/managed: istio.io-gateway-controller` label?  

I've changed the text, but it might need further changes based on the answers to the above questions.

Author: Looks like Istio uses the listener name for the first listener that specifies the port: https://github.com/istio/istio/blob/c2b0f368d18ba54f216baa0d0ef6e023a1ee75fc/pilot/pkg/config/kube/gateway/deploymentcontroller.go#L376-L388

Is that the behavior that you've observed?

Reviewer 2: > Is the service always configured with externalTrafficPolicy: Cluster? Can we specify externalTrafficPolicy: Local instead?

Doesn't look like it. Istio uses a template: https://github.com/istio/istio/blob/c2b0f368d18ba54f216baa0d0ef6e023a1ee75fc/pilot/pkg/config/kube/gateway/templates/service.yaml and there's no specification of `externalTrafficPolicy`, which mean it uses the default of `cluster`.

> Why doesn't your example have a port for HTTPS?

Ah yea sorry I just had a HTTP port 80 listener in my example, no HTTPS.

> Does Istio tie the service's lifecycle to the gateway's? (The owner reference suggests that it does.)

I believe so. It deletes the service when you delete the gateway, so I'd interpret that as they are tied to together.

> What is the significance of the gateway.istio.io/managed: istio.io-gateway-controller label?

Sounds like it's just used for filtering: https://github.com/istio/istio/blob/c2b0f368d18ba54f216baa0d0ef6e023a1ee75fc/pilot/pkg/config/kube/gateway/deploymentcontroller.go#L138 

> Looks like Istio uses the listener name for the first listener that specifies the port:

Correct, that's the behavior I see, just tested it. However, you made me realize something: the default ingress gateway (istio-ingressgateway) only specifies port 80 and 443, so you'd need to edit istio-ingressgateway in order to use another port (maybe that's obvious, but I hadn't thought about that until now). I confirmed Istio doesn't reconcile your changes to the istio-ingressgateway service.

Reviewer 2: > Annotations and labels on the Gateway will be copied to the Service and Deployment. This allows configuring things such as Internal load balancers that read from these fields.

Just to be clear, this doesn't apply to the default `istio-ingressgateway`, only automatic deployments. This is probably pretty obvious, but I'm just learning that Istio creates `istio-ingressgateway` and doesn't do anything else to it.

Author: > the default ingress gateway (istio-ingressgateway) only specifies port 80 and 443, so you'd need to edit istio-ingressgateway in order to use another port (maybe that's obvious, but I hadn't thought about that until now).

Hm, I hadn't realized that either.  So the istio-ingressgateway service has the same ports irrespective of what listeners you specify in the Gateway?

Reviewer 2: Right, the same 80 and 443 ports. Here is a fresh istio-ingressgateway service just for reference (no gateways or httproutes):
```
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  annotations:
  creationTimestamp: "2023-02-07T23:12:21Z"
  finalizers:
  - service.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-cleanup
  labels:
    app: istio-ingressgateway
    app.kubernetes.io/component: istio-ingress
    app.kubernetes.io/instance: gwapi
    app.kubernetes.io/managed-by: maistra-istio-operator
    app.kubernetes.io/name: istio-ingress
    app.kubernetes.io/part-of: istio
    app.kubernetes.io/version: 2.3.1-1-1
    istio: ingressgateway
    istio.io/rev: istio-ingress
    maistra-version: 2.3.1
    maistra.io/owner: gwapi
    maistra.io/owner-name: istio-ingress
    release: istio
  name: istio-ingressgateway
  namespace: gwapi
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: maistra.io/v2
    blockOwnerDeletion: true
    controller: true
    kind: ServiceMeshControlPlane
    name: istio-ingress
    uid: 314c0d5c-edfe-4a5a-89f2-0fe049f5b4e3
  resourceVersion: "218075"
  uid: 9051354f-b9d8-4230-be60-6be2aafb16e1
spec:
  allocateLoadBalancerNodePorts: true
  clusterIP: 172.30.171.40
  clusterIPs:
  - 172.30.171.40
  externalTrafficPolicy: Cluster
  internalTrafficPolicy: Cluster
  ipFamilies:
  - IPv4
  ipFamilyPolicy: SingleStack
  ports:
  - name: status-port
    nodePort: 30390
    port: 15021
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: 15021
  - name: http2
    nodePort: 30449
    port: 80
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: 8080
  - name: https
    nodePort: 31445
    port: 443
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: 8443
  selector:
    app: istio-ingressgateway
    istio: ingressgateway
  sessionAffinity: None
  type: LoadBalancer
status:
  loadBalancer:
    ingress:
    - hostname: a9051354fb9d84230be606be2aafb16e-1375246106.us-east-1.elb.amazonaws.com
```

    port: 443
```

In this configuration, the Gateway defines three listeners with two different
host names: `*.stage.example.com` and `*.prod.example.com`, as well as two
different TCP ports: 80 and 443.  For this Gateway, Istio creates the following
service (again, some extraneous details are abbreviated in the following
example):

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  labels:
    gateway.istio.io/managed: istio.io-gateway-controller
  name: example-gateway
  namespace: openshift-ingress
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
    kind: Gateway
    name: gateway
spec:
  ports:
  - name: status-port
    port: 15021
    protocol: TCP
  - name: stage-http
    port: 80
    protocol: TCP
  - name: stage-https
    port: 443
    protocol: TCP
  selector:
    istio.io/gateway-name: gateway
  type: LoadBalancer
status:
  loadBalancer:
    ingress:
    - hostname: lb.example.com
```

> Note that the service defines each port once.  When multiple listeners specify

Reviewer 2: I'm good with this wording/content regarding loadbalancer/services, but one of my nit picks is that it's under the `#### New Controller to Manage DNS Records for Gateway Listeners` section, which seems different. Is it worth creating a `Load Balancer Management` section? Though, I won't push back if you want to re-organize this up later.

Author: This section describes the implementation details, and I've kept it focused on the changes required in cluster-ingress-operator.  Earlier I was thinking there would be a controller in cluster-ingress-operator for managing the service, but since Istio handles that, I removed that section and just put this example here to show what cluster-ingress-operator has to work with.  I want to be clear that the LB management isn't new (i.e. it's already implemented) and isn't handled by cluster-ingress-operator (i.e. Istio handles it).  Would it be better to have a separate section to provide background on Istio's existing LB management logic, or would some kind of prefatory statement (e.g., "First, it is important to understand Istio's 'automated deployment' feature.")?

Reviewer 2: > This section describes the implementation details, and I've kept it focused on the changes required in cluster-ingress-operator.

Yes, but this specific section, `New Controller to Manage DNS Records for Gateway Listeners`, is describing the DNS controller updates. My minor nit pick here, are these loadbalancer details feels a bit shoehorned into this section about DNS, and probably worth it's own section, just for better organization.

> Would it be better to have a separate section to provide background on Istio's existing LB management logic

Yea that's what I'm suggesting here. We can do it later (or never), it's just my thought on keeping things organized.

Author: I added more info about LB management to the "New Controller to Install and Configure OpenShift Service Mesh" section in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/compare/732fe4ef4bfdf98263827650e5ca5127479bc8d1..5ccb87fd14dd84eebfc38506dc1596a75eeccdfb#diff-7973eca3c2f112ece8f8585f4f4c6567fc1c1b4fa95be7f88a27ce08820d89f7.

the same port, Istio names the service port using the name of the first listener
that specifies the port.  Multiplexing different host names using the same port
number is done using TLS SNI or the HTTP `host` request header.  In addition,
Istio adds a port named "status-port", which load balancers can use for health

> checks.  Istio automatically deletes the service when the Gateway is deleted.

Reviewer: The automatic delete and the stuff in the Note below happen because of the automated deployment, right?

Author: I believe the specific mechanism is the garbage collector.  The service has an owner reference on the Gateway, so when the Gateway is deleted, the garbage collector should remove the service.

Reviewer: I don't know if you want to add a reference to the open bug: https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-8681

Author: I don't think the implementation details matter for this EP beyond that Istio does this step automatically.

  name: example-gateway
  namespace: openshift-ingress
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
    kind: Gateway
    name: example-gateway
spec:
  ports:
  - name: status-port
    port: 15021
  - name: stage-http
    port: 80
  - name: stage-https
    port: 443
  selector:
    istio.io/gateway-name: example-gateway
  type: LoadBalancer
status:
  loadBalancer:
    ingress:
    - hostname: lb.example.com
```

Note that the service defines each port once.  When multiple listeners specify
the same port, Istio names the service port using the name of the first listener
that specifies the port.  Multiplexing different host names using the same port
number is done using TLS SNI or the HTTP `host` request header.  In addition,
Istio adds a port named "status-port", which load balancers can use for health
checks.  Istio automatically deletes the service when the Gateway is deleted.

(Note that making this service configurable is a non-goal for dev preview.
Options such as service type, whether to use PROXY protocol, timeouts, and other
cloud-specific parameters may be made configurable as a follow-up to this

> enhancement, after dev preview.)

Reviewer 2: _Side note_: Is this something we should consider for tech preview?

    port: 443
```

In this configuration, the Gateway defines three listeners with two different
host names: `*.stage.example.com` and `*.prod.example.com`, as well as two
different TCP ports: 80 and 443.  For this Gateway, Istio creates the following
service (again, some extraneous details are abbreviated in the following
example):

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  labels:
    gateway.istio.io/managed: openshift.io-gateway-controller
  name: example-gateway
  namespace: openshift-ingress
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
    kind: Gateway
    name: example-gateway
spec:
  ports:
  - name: status-port
    port: 15021
  - name: stage-http
    port: 80

>   - name: stage-https

Reviewer: That's a little bit confusing example.  Maybe note that the ports are in use by two listeners, but got named for only one of the listeners.

    ownerReferences:
    - apiVersion: v1
      kind: Service

>       name: example-gateway-loadbalancer-service

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this just be:
```suggestion
      name: example-gateway
```

Going with the example above, the names don't match.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/compare/732fe4ef4bfdf98263827650e5ca5127479bc8d1..5ccb87fd14dd84eebfc38506dc1596a75eeccdfb#diff-7973eca3c2f112ece8f8585f4f4c6567fc1c1b4fa95be7f88a27ce08820d89f7.

For the time being, we may defer the ability to customize the parameters
described above and address the question in a followup EP for tech preview.

**Resolution**: Deferred until tech preview.  For dev preview, we do not allow
customization of the SMCP.  The Ingress Operator simply specifies the
"gateway-controller" profile.  This profile enables Gateway API for ingress,
with cluster-wide watches for Gateway API CRs.  It also enables mesh, and
individual namespaces can be added to this mesh using ServiceMeshMember and
ServiceMeshMemberRoll CRs.  We will revisit the possibility of allowing the
cluster admin to configure parameters on the SMCP in tech preview once we have
some end-user feedback regarding what parameters end-users want to be able to

> customize on the SMCP.

Reviewer: Did I miss where you mention whether a namespace can both be used by gateways and be a part of the service mesh?  Or is that a different question?

Author: I don't think that that question has come up before.  Is there a reason to believe it might not be possible for a namespace both to be in a mesh and to have routes attached to a gateway?

Reviewer: It's worth testing whether there would be two envoy pods installed, and whether they conflict somehow.  But the details don't need to be worked out right now.

Author: It depends on how the SMCP is configured.  The Ingress Operator configures the SMCP with `spec.gateways.ingress.enabled: true`, which results in having the "istio-ingressgateway" deployment, and the Ingress Operator also enables Gateway API, which has automated deployment, so there should be an Envoy deployment for each gateway.  Then (once https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSSM-3358 is fixed) the cluster admin can create an SMCP that creates Envoy deployments as specified using `spec.gateways.ingress.enabled` and `spec.gateways.egress.enabled`.  If there were some conflict between Envoy deployments, that would be a bug in OSSM.

For the time being, we may defer the ability to customize the parameters
described above and address the question in a followup EP for tech preview.

**Resolution**: Deferred until tech preview.  For dev preview, we do not allow
customization of the SMCP.  The Ingress Operator simply specifies the

> "gateway-controller" profile.  This profile enables Gateway API for ingress,

Reviewer 2: I don' think we specify the "gateway-controller" profile for dev preview?

Author: Whoops, I forgot to update that.  Fixed in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/compare/5ccb87fd14dd84eebfc38506dc1596a75eeccdfb..d60687328a0112a0472424afaf6ec4cc2611b98c.

with cluster-wide watches for Gateway API CRs.  It also enables mesh, and
individual namespaces can be added to this mesh using ServiceMeshMember and
ServiceMeshMemberRoll CRs.  We will revisit the possibility of allowing the
cluster admin to configure parameters on the SMCP in tech preview once we have
some end-user feedback regarding what parameters end-users want to be able to
customize on the SMCP.

Introducing a new config CRD would lead to another question: _How would we
expose SMCP parameters without duplicating a significant number of definitions
from the SMCP CRD?_

The [Service Mesh control plane profiles](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12/service_mesh/v2x/ossm-profiles-users.html#ossm-control-plane-profiles_ossm-profiles-users) is potentially useful to resolve
this last question.  For example, the Service Mesh Operator could provide a set
of profiles covering popular configurations, and the Ingress Operator could
provide an API for the cluster admin to choose a subset of these profiles in
order to configure the SMCP that the Ingress Operator manages.

**Resolution**: Deferred until tech preview.  For dev preview, we will hard-code

> the "gateway-controller" profile.  In the future, we may allow the cluster admin

Reviewer 2: I don' think we specify the "gateway-controller" profile for dev preview?

Author: You're right.  Fixed in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/compare/5ccb87fd14dd84eebfc38506dc1596a75eeccdfb..d60687328a0112a0472424afaf6ec4cc2611b98c.

For the time being, we may defer the ability to customize the parameters
described above and address the question in a followup EP for tech preview.

**Resolution**: Deferred until tech preview.  For dev preview, we do not allow

> customization of the SMCP.  The Ingress Operator simply specifies a fixed set of

Author: ¯\\\_ (ツ)\_/¯.  Updated in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/compare/d60687328a0112a0472424afaf6ec4cc2611b98c..213a342986d10d3ebaaf83ee784ca2867d8b0eb7.

configuration options on the SMCP.  This profile enables Gateway API for
ingress, with cluster-wide watches for Gateway API CRs.  It also enables mesh,
and individual namespaces can be added to this mesh using ServiceMeshMember and
ServiceMeshMemberRoll CRs.  We will revisit the possibility of allowing the
cluster admin to configure parameters on the SMCP in tech preview once we have
some end-user feedback regarding what parameters end-users want to be able to
customize on the SMCP.

Introducing a new config CRD would lead to another question: _How would we
expose SMCP parameters without duplicating a significant number of definitions
from the SMCP CRD?_

The [Service Mesh control plane profiles](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12/service_mesh/v2x/ossm-profiles-users.html#ossm-control-plane-profiles_ossm-profiles-users) is potentially useful to resolve
this last question.  For example, the Service Mesh Operator could provide a set
of profiles covering popular configurations, and the Ingress Operator could
provide an API for the cluster admin to choose a subset of these profiles in
order to configure the SMCP that the Ingress Operator manages.

> **Resolution**: Deferred until tech preview.  For dev preview, we hard-codes the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Resolution**: Deferred until tech preview.  For dev preview, we hard-code the
```

Author: Whoops, accidentally Gollumed my words.  Fixed in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/compare/d60687328a0112a0472424afaf6ec4cc2611b98c..213a342986d10d3ebaaf83ee784ca2867d8b0eb7.
